---
layout: default
title: "Brutus Unblessed, Yearns for Hypnos"
date: 20260714
---
# Brutus Unblessed, Yearns for Hypnos

*The eye sees not itself, but by reflection.
I think it is the weakness of my eyes.
That noble vessel full of grief, that runs over at the eyes.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest.

The story of Brutus, through dialogues about his eyes.*

If there were one god in the Greco-Roman pantheon that governed Brutus, who would it be? Maybe warring Mars or statesman Jupiter; perhaps wise Minerva or bright Apollo. The latter seems particularly suited, for Shakespeare’s Brutus embodies an idealism and reason which become his fatal flaw. He strives towards the Apollonian ideal. Through reason alone, he commits murder and bears immeasurable grief. Portia, his wife, swallows burning coals to commit suicide. She had wounded her thigh to prove her fortitude to Brutus, and had begged him upon her knees to share his troubles. Yet, Brutus merely says to Cassius, “Portia is dead.” He refuses to speak of her, and when pressed publicly, all he says is, “Why, farewell, Portia. We must die.” He says that he had meditated upon her death before, and thus bears it. Brutus, obsessed with abstract ideals, had forsaken the concrete, the marble and flesh.  

Yet Apollo is only the god that Brutus chooses, not the god that chooses Brutus. Apart from Apollo, another deity lingers throughout the play, one not as loud as the Olympians, but much more primordial: the god of sleep. Brutus was an educated elite Roman, steeped in Greek thought. Since he mentions Erebus when speaking of the conspiracy, “Not Erebus itself were dim enough to hide thee from prevention;” he would perhaps have known this god as Hypnos rather than the Roman Somnus. Hypnos, like Brutus, once unwittingly started the chain of events leading to a king’s fall at Troy. Born of Night, whom even Zeus did not dare cross, Ovid places him in a sunless soundless cave without doors, lest a hinge might creak. Poppies crowd the entrance and Lethe, the river of forgetfulness, murmurs nearby. No birds sing, as Hypnos lies in his ebony bed surrounded by dreams. These symbols recur around Brutus.

Sleep was more than just a bodily necessity to the Greeks; it meant restoration, health, dreams, oblivion. All of these were denied to Brutus. The gentle oblivion of sleep was not considered separate from the eternal oblivion of death. Thanatos, the god of death, was in fact the twin of Hypnos. Elizabethan England, for whom the play was written, held insomnia as a sign of disconnection from the natural order. Shakespeare repeatedly punishes the tyrannous or tainted with insomnia; Hamlet and Henry V, for example. Hypnos is known to be gentle, yet it seems he had punished Brutus. Not by cursing him, but merely by withholding his blessings. Brutus, thus unblessed, seems trapped between chasing the Apollonian and being punished by Hypnos.

Brutus often speaks of sleep, and it marks important turns of events in the play. The beginning of his insomnia marked the beginning of the conspiracy. “Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar, I have not slept.” His most human moments involve sleep; his gently removing the lyre from the arms of a sleeping Lucius, or offering his servants to sleep on pillows in his tent. Every scene between Brutus and Lucius turns upon sleep. Brutus removes the lyre from the sleeping boy's arms and whispers, "Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber." Lucius has "no figures nor no fancies" to trouble him. Brutus envies that innocence. He longed for the gifts that Hypnos bestowed upon Lucius so freely. He wished it were his “fault to sleep so soundly.”

Brutus does not yearn so much for the comfort of sleep, as he does for its oblivion. He repeatedly wishes he were someone else. He says he would rather be a villager than “repute myself a son of Rome.” He says he would rather “be a dog and bay at the Moon” than be “such a Roman.” The current state of Rome haunts him; his ancestors had saved Rome from the tyranny of Tarquin. He stains his hands with the blood of his friend to spare the republic. Yet, instead of liberating Rome, his noble ideals collapsed it. He spared Antony and he marched to Philippi against the warnings of Cassius. Had he heeded these warnings against his own calculating mind, the republic might have survived. His cold logic repeatedly failed to calculate the tempestuous emotions of the public. Apollo gave him his eyes, but Hypnos forced them open to the horror he had unleashed. The “leaden mace” of slumber was denied to him. Hypnos so cruelly taking away his sleep, forbade him Lethe, which he yearned for.

At Sardis, he buckles. “O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.” His composure at the death of Portia was no peace, but merely suppression. He seeks oblivion in wine. “Speak no more of her.—Give me a bowl of wine.—In this I bury all unkindness." He discusses the necessary, and plans the march that eventually kills him. His servants sleep on pillows around him, and he removes the lyre from gentle hands that pluck it no longer. He tries to dissolve his surroundings by reading in the faint candlelight. “Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turned down where I left reading? Here it is, I think. How ill this taper burns.” It was here that Shakespeare, or Hypnos, had him confront himself once more. He is visited by the ghost of Caesar who introduces himself as Brutus’ “evil spirit.” Was it his insomnia turning hallucinogenic? Was it Hypnos sending his phantasmic children to haunt him from the ivory gate? Whether the ghost was divine, poetic, medical or otherwise, this night at Sardis marked his descent. It was a reminder that he had sinned, and shall be placed by Dante in the jaws of Satan. “Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then,” says the ghost. “Ay, at Philippi,” says Brutus.

At Philippi, Brutus decided not to dip his toes in Lethe, but plunge into it. “Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest, that have but labored to attain this hour.” Brutus stands in the dark among the few who remain. They refuse to hold his sword. He greets Lethe not through cruel Hypnos, so gentle to others, but by his twin, Thanatos; whom he met at the tip of his own sword. “Caesar, now be still…” were his last words, granting Caesar the stillness which he himself longed for.
